>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, OCTOBER 18...
ISRAEL IMPOSES NEW SECURITY
MEASURES FOLLOWING A SERIES OF
KNIFE ATTACKS.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
AMERICAN PORTS IN A COSTLY RACE
TO MODERNIZE AND STAY
COMPETITIVE.
>> IF WE DO NOT DEEPEN THIS
PORT, I WOULD EXPECT TO SEE THE
BUSINESS GRADUALLY MOVE NORTH OF
HERE.
AND ALL THOSE JOBS WILL MOVE
THERE AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, DISARMING
IRAN: TODAY THE COMPLICATED TASK
OF DISMANTLING ITS NUCLEAR
PROGRAM BEGINS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ISRAEL IS ANNOUNCING NEW STEPS
TO CURB A RASH OF DEADLY ATTACKS
ON ITS CITIZENS.
AN ARAB MAN SHOT AND STABBED
PEOPLE IN A BUS STATION IN THE
SOUTHERN ISRAELI CITY OF
BEERSHEBA.
POLICE SAY AN ISRAELI SOLDIER
DIED, AND TEN PEOPLE WERE
WOUNDED.
EARLIER IN THE DAY, THE ISRAELI
CABINET PROPOSED POLICE BE
ALLOWED TO STOP AND FRISK ANYONE
ON THE STREET SUSPECTED OF
CARRYING A WEAPON.
TEL AVIV AND THREE OTHER CITIES
SAID THEY WILL PROHIBIT ARAB
WORKERS IN THEIR SCHOOLS
STARTING TOMORROW.
AND ISRAEL IS ENFORCING
ROADBLOCKS IN ARAB EAST
JERUSALEM.
THE MOVE COMES A DAY AFTER
PALESTINIANS CARRIED OUT FIVE
KNIFE ATTACKS ON ISRAELIS IN
JERUSALEM AND THE WEST BANK.
FOUR OF THOSE ATTACKERS WERE
SHOT AND KILLED.
OVER THE PAST MONTH, EIGHT
ISRAELIS HAVE DIED IN
PALESTINIAN STABBINGS, WHILE
ISRAELI SOLDIERS AND POLICE HAVE
SHOT AND KILLED AROUND 40
PALESTINIANS IN CLASHES, MANY OF
WHOM ISRAEL IDENTIFIED AS KNIFE
ATTACKERS.
TODAY, ISRAELI SOLDIERS REMOVED
30 JEWISH WORSHIPPERS WHO DID
NOT HAVE PERMISSION TO GATHER
IN"
JOSEPH'S TOMB," A SHRINE NAMED
AFTER THE BIBLICAL JOSEPH IN THE
PALESTINIAN-CONTROLLED CITY OF
NABLUS.
THE UNREST THAT BEGAN FOUR WEEKS
AGO WAS FUELED BY RUMORS THAT
ISRAEL MIGHT LIMIT ACCESS TO THE
AL AQSA MOSQUE IN JERUSALEM'S
OLD CITY.
AGAIN TODAY ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU SAID
THAT IS WRONG, THAT ISRAEL IS"
PRESERVING THE STATUS QUO" IN
THE OLD CITY, WHICH HAS SITES
SACRED TO JEWS, MUSLIMS, AND
CHRISTIANS.
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY SAID TODAY HE PLANS TO
MEET SEPARATELY THIS WEEK WITH
NETANYAHU AND PALESTINIAN
PRESIDENT MAHMOUD ABBAS TO TRY
TO DEFUSE TENSIONS.
CORRESPONDENT MARTIN SEEMUNGAL
IS IN JERUSALEM AND JOINS ME NOW
BY SKYPE TO DISCUSS THE LATEST
ON THE SITUATION THERE.
WHAT ARE THE IMPACTS
ON A DAY TO DAY BASIS OF ALL
THESE ROADBLOCKS, DO YOU FEEL
IT?
YEAH, YOU KNOW, WE'VE BEEN
COMING TO EAST JERUSALEM FOR
QUITE SOME TIME AND HAVE NEVER
SEEN ROADBLOCKS.
THERE IS ONE JUST DOWN THE ROAD
THAT HAS NEVER BEEN HERE IN THE
TIME I HAVE BEEN COMING HERE.
INITIALLY IT WAS JUST A CAR WITH
SOME BORDER POLICE MANNING THE
ROAD BLOCKS, STOPPING PEOPLE.
NEXT DAY THEY DROPPED ABOUT
THREE OR FOUR HUGE CON CREATE
BLOCKS ON THE ROAD.
BUT THERE ARE ROADBLOCKS GOING
OUT OF MOST OF THE AREAS
OF-- THE ARAB AREAS OF EAST
JERUSALEM, SOME CLOSER TO
JERUSALEM ITSELF.
OTHERS A LITTLE BIT MORE REMOTE.
SOME OF THE ARAB AREAS THERE,
WHERE BASICALLY WE KNOW THAT THE
ISRAELIS ARE SAYING THE THREE OF
THE ALLEGED ASSAILANTS ACTUALLY
CAME FROM THAT AREA.
AND THAT AREA HAS BEEN-- SEEMS
TO HAVE BEEN SEALED OFF.
AND OBVIOUSLY THIS CAUSES ALL
KINDS OF TENSION IN AND AROUND
THE AREA.
JERUSALEM, PEOPLE LIVE IN CLOSE
QUARTERS, IT DOES HAVE AN IMPACT
ON DAY TO DAY LIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: CAN YOU FEEL THE
TENSION?
IS IT PALPABLE?
THIS IS A REGION THAT IS USED TO
THESE SORTS OF STRESSES.
>> YEAH, BUT THIS IS SOME WHAT
DIFFERENT, HARI.
BECAUSE WHAT YOU'VE GOT ARE
THESE KNIFE ATTACKS.
THEY COME RANDOMLY.
YOU KNOW, YOU TALK TO JEWISH
ISRAELIS ON THE STREET AND THEY
SAY, YOU KNOW, WE COULD BE
STANDING AT A BUS STOP WAITING
TO CATCH THE BUS AND THERE COULD
BE AN ATTACK RIGHT THERE.
IT COMES WITHOUT WARNING.
AS A RESULT OF THAT, PEOPLE ARE
REALLY QUITE NERVOUS ABOUT IT.
AND THAT IS SOMETHING WE HADN'T
SEEN SINCE ITS SECOND INTIFADA,
I SUPPOSE THERE COULD BE THOSE
TENSION BACK IN 2001 WHEN I WAS
ALSO HERE WITH THE BUS BOMBS
GOING OFF, AND THE SUICIDE BOMBS
THAT WERE ASSOCIATED WITH
THAT SECOND INTIFADA.
THIS ROUND OF VIOLENCE, OF
STRIFE IF YOU WANT TO CALL IT,
IS BASICALLY DRIVEN BY RANDOM
KNIFE ATTACKS.
LONE WOLVES.
AND NOT ONLY DOES THAT CAUSE A
LOT OF TENSION, BUT JUST PEOPLE
GOING ABOUT THEIR DAILY LIVES
WHETHER IT'S GOING SHOPPING,
GOING TO THE BUS STOP OR
WHATEVER.
BUT IT MAKES IT VERY DIFFICULT
FOR THE ISRAELI POLICE TO COMBAT
IT AND HENCE THEY ARE PUTTING IN
THE ROADBLOCKS TO TRY TO DO
SOMETHING ABOUT IT.
>> I ALSO WANT TO GIVE OUR
VIEWERS A LITTLE BIT OF A
PREVIEW OF THE PIECE THAT YOU
ARE WORKING ON FOR THE PROGRAM
TOMORROW NIGHT.
>> WELL, AS YOU KNOW, THERE WAS
THIS ATTACK LAST WEEK INVOLVING
TWO TEENAGERS.
YOU HAD A 13 YEAR OLD ARAB
PALESTINIAN ATTACKING A JEWISH
BOY.
HE WAS, IN A LOT OF THESE CASES
THE ATTACKERS ARE SHOT DEAD
INSTANTLY.
HE HAD BEEN HIT BY A CAR, THAT
VIDEO WENT OUT THERE WAS A GREAT
DEAL OF ANGER IN THE ARAB WORLD
BECAUSE IT SEEMED THAT NOBODY
WAS DOING ANYTHING TO HELP THE
BOY.
HE'S NOW IN HOSPITAL.
WE HAVE SPOKEN TO HIS-- SOME OF
HIS FRIENDS, HIS FAMILY.
AND WE TALKED TO PEOPLE ON THE
OTHER SIDE, ON THE JEWISH SIDE.
WE HAVE GONE TO THAT SETTLEMENT
TO TRY TO GET A SENSE OF WHAT
THAT IS DONE THIS.
WE ARE TRYING TO DO A STORY OF
SOMETHING THAT HASN'T REALLY
BEEN SEEN BEFORE IN ISRAEL.
FIRST OF ALL THESE LONE ATTACKS,
AND THE ATTACKERS GETTING
YOUNGER AND YOUNGER.
>> Sreenivasan: MARTIN
SEEMUNGAL, LOOKING FORWARD TO
YOUR PIECE TOMORROW.
>> Sreenivasan: 1,000 MIGRANTS
CROSSED THE BORDER FROM SLOVENIA
INTO AUSTRIA TODAY .
BECAUSE OF HUNGARY'S CLOSURE OF
ITS BORDER WITH NEIGHBORING
CROATIA YESTERDAY.
BUT SLOVENIA SAID TODAY IT WILL
NOT ACCEPT AN "UNLIMITED" NUMBER
OF MIGRANTS.
MEANWHILE, GERMAN CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL MET WITH TURKEY'S
PRIME MINISTER TO TRY AND
ADDRESS THE CRISIS CLOSER TO
WHERE MOST REFUGEES FROM SYRIA,
AND AFRICA ENTER EUROPE.
MANY COME INTO TURKEY BEFORE
LAUNCHING ON BOATS FOR GREECE
AND ITALY.
THE ITALIAN COAST GUARD RESCUED
600 SUCH MIGRANTS FROM THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA THIS WEEKEND.
HAWAII IS NOW FACING THE HIGHEST
RATE OF HOMELESSNESS PER CAPITA
IN THE UNITED STATES.
THE STATE NOW COUNTS 7,600
HOMELESS PEOPLE, WHICH IS 465
HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS FOR EVERY
100,000 RESIDENTS.
THAT'S A 23% INCREASE IN THE
PAST YEAR.
HAWAII'S GOVERNOR DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY AFTER
CLEARING OUT ONE OF THE STATE'S
BIGGEST HOMELESS CAMPS.
AND IS NOW PLEDGING TO SPEND
$1.3 MILLION ON NEW HOMELESS
SHELTERS AND SERVICES.
LEARN MORE ABOUT SECRETARY
KERRY'S UPCOMING SEPARATE
MEETINGS WITH ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU AND
PALESTINIAN PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: AMERICAN PORT
CITIES ARE TRYING TO KEEP UP
WITH THE INCREASING SIZE OF
CARGO SHIPS, AND BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS ARE AT STAKE.
EVEN THE PANAMA CANAL IS GETTING
WIDER TO BETTER BE ABLE TO ALLOW
THESE MEGA SHIPS THROUGH.
BUT WHEN THEY GET TO U.S.
SHORES, SOME U.S. PORTS JUST
AREN'T DEEP ENOUGH TO RECEIVE
THEM.
KEEP IN MIND, THREE QUARTERS OF
EVERYTHING WE TRADE WITH THE
WORLD COMES THROUGH THESE PORTS.
SO SHOULD THESE CITIES MAKE
THEIR PORTS DEEPER?
OR ARE THE COSTS, BOTH ECONOMIC
AND ENVIRONMENTAL, TOO STEEP?
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS FROM ONE SUCH PORT IN
JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA.
>> Reporter: IT'S A TYPICAL,
BUSY MORNING AT THE PORT IN
JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA'S MOST
POPULOUS CITY.
VINCENT CAMERON HAS WORKED ON
THE DOCKS HERE FOR 25 YEARS.
>> THESE BOXES THAT ARE COMING
OFF THESE SHIPS BEHIND YOU HAVE
ALL TYPES OF CARGO IN THEM, AND
THEY GO TO ALL DIFFERENT
DESTINATIONS.
FROM YOUR PIER-ONES, YOUR WAL-
MARTS, YOUR TARGETS, TO YOUR
WAREHOUSES, TO YOUR FACTORIES,
THE PAPER MILL, YOU NAME IT.
>> Reporter: THIS MASSIVE PORT
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS SOME EIGHT
MILLION TONS OF CARGO A YEAR,
WORTH AROUND $33 BILLION,
GENERATING ALMOST $170 MILLION
IN STATE AND LOCAL TAXES.
THE JACKSONVILLE PORT, CALLED
JAXPORT FOR SHORT, IS A MID-SIZE
PORT, RANKING 37TH OUT OF THE 99
BIGGEST U.S. PORTS BY CARGO
VOLUME.
BUT IT'S ALSO ONE OF THE FASTEST
GROWING U.S. PORTS FOR
EXPORTING.
IT SHIPS MORE CARS OUT OF THE
U.S. THAN ANY OTHER PORT IN THE
COUNTRY, AND IT'S A MAJOR IMPORT
HUB FOR COMPANIES LIKE DISNEY,
BACARDI, MAXWELL HOUSE, AND
SAMSONITE.
THE PORT IS LOCATED JUST OFF THE
ATLANTIC OCEAN ON THE ST. JOHNS
RIVER.
WHEN CARGO COMES IN, IT'S
DELIVERED QUICKLY OVER THREE
INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS AND EVEN
MORE FREIGHT TRAIN LINES ACROSS
THE SOUTHEAST UNITED STATES.
>> JACKSONVILLE IS A PORT CITY.
YOU KNOW, WE DERIVE OUR FRUITS
FROM THE LABORS THAT TAKE PLACE
RIGHT HERE ON THESE VERY DOCKS.
>> Reporter: CAMERON, A THIRD
GENERATION LONGSHOREMAN, IS ONE
OF 10,000 PEOPLE EMPLOYED AT THE
PORT, WHICH SUPPORTS THOUSANDS
OF JOBS AT LOCAL BUSINESSES TOO.
>> IT'S A BIG ECONOMIC ENGINE
FOR THE CITY OF JACKSONVILLE,
AND IT NEEDS TO SURVIVE IF THE
CITY IS GOING TO CONTINUE TO
THRIVE.
>> Reporter: TO THRIVE IN THE
GLOBAL ECONOMY, JAXPORT HAS
SPENT TENS OF MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN THE PAST DECADE TO
MODERNIZE AND TO COMPETE WITH
PORTS TO THE NORTH, LIKE
SAVANNAH, GEORGIA, AND
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA.
IN 2009, THE PORT COMPLETED A
HIGH-TECH TERMINAL WITH 275-FOOT
TALL CRANES TO REACH ACROSS THE
DECKS OF THE LARGEST SHIPS THAT
DOCK HERE.
IT INSTALLED STATE-OF-THE ART
TECHNOLOGY TO PROVIDE SHIPS
ENTERING THE PORT BETTER
NAVIGATIONAL INFORMATION.
AND TO SPEED UP CARGO DELIVERY,
THE PORT IS NOW BUILDING A
FACILITY TO TRANSFER CONTAINERS
DIRECTLY FROM SHIPS ONTO FREIGHT
TRAINS.
AND THE PORT'S JUMPING INTO THE
BUSINESS OF SERVICING NEW SHIPS
POWERED BY LIQUEFIED NATURAL
GAS, A CLEANER BURNING FUEL THAN
THE FUEL OIL USED BY MOST CARGO
SHIPS.
BUT ALL OF THESE INNOVATIONS
MIGHT NOT BE ENOUGH FOR JAXPORT
TO STAY COMPETITIVE, ACCORDING
JAXPORT C.E.O. BRIAN TAYLOR, WHO
SAYS THE PORT NOW NEEDS TO BE
DEEPENED BY SEVEN FEET.
>> DEEPENING THE PORT IS TO
ALLOW US TO COMPETE AND HANDLE
THE SHIPS OF THE FUTURE THAT ARE
GOING TO BE CARRYING THE CARGO
TO THE EAST COAST PORTS.
>> Reporter: IN THE LAST TWO
DECADES, THE SHIPPING INDUSTRY
HAS BUILT BIGGER AND BIGGER
SHIPS, TRIPLING THE CAPACITY OF
THE LARGEST ONES.
TODAY, THE BIGGEST SHIP IS A
QUARTER-MILE LONG, LONGER THAN
THE EMPIRE STATE BUILDING IS
TALL.
AS A RESULT, THE 101-YEAR-OLD
PANAMA CANAL, WHICH CONNECTS THE
PACIFIC AND ATLANTIC OCEANS, IS
EXPANDING TO ACCOMMODATE THE NEW
SHIPS, DOUBLING ITS CAPACITY BY
DEEPENING AND WIDENING ITS
CHANNELS.
THE PROJECT COULD BE DONE AS
EARLY AS NEXT YEAR.
A REPORT BY THE BOSTON
CONSULTING GROUP ESTIMATES THAT
THE PANAMA CANAL EXPANSION COULD
LEAD TO 10% OF WEST COAST SHIP
TRAFFIC SHIFTING TO THE EAST IN
THE NEXT FIVE YEARS.
PORTS UP AND DOWN THE EASTERN
SEABOARD ARE SPENDING BILLIONS
TO SNAG A SHARE OF THAT TRAFFIC.
JAXPORT'S TAYLOR SAYS HIS HARBOR
NEEDS TO BE DEEPENED BY SEVEN
FEET, OR ELSE.
>> WE WILL LOSE THE OPPORTUNITY
TO PARTICIPATE IN THE SINGLE
BIGGEST GROWTH SEGMENT OVER THE
NEXT 20 YEARS.
>> Reporter: TAYLOR SAYS HIS 40-
FOOT DEEP CHANNEL IS ALREADY TOO
SHALLOW.
IT REQUIRES SOME LARGE SHIPS TO
CARRY LESS THAN A FULL LOAD TO
AVOID SCRAPING THE BOTTOM.
AND THAT RESULTS IN LESS REVENUE
FOR THE PORT.
>> IF WE DO NOT DEEPEN THIS
PORT, I WOULD EXPECT TO SEE THE
BUSINESS THAT WE'VE WORKED SO
HARD TO GAIN TO GRADUALLY MOVE
NORTH OF HERE, AND ALL THOSE
JOBS THAT WE'VE WORKED TO GAIN
WILL MOVE THERE AS WELL.
>> Reporter: THE 13-MILE
DREDGING PROJECT, SIMULATED IN
THIS JAXPORT VIDEO, HAS A BIG
PRICE TAG: NEARLY $700 MILLION.
ALL OF IT IS EXPECTED TO COME
FROM THE GOVERNMENT.
LAST YEAR, CONGRESS PASSED A $12
BILLION BILL TO IMPROVE THE
NATION'S PORTS.
BUT SO FAR, JAXPORT HASN'T SEEN
ANY FEDERAL FUNDING.
SAVANNAH AND CHARLESTON HAVE;
THEY MOVE MORE CARGO AND GOT AN
EARLIER START ON THEIR EXPANSION
PROJECTS.
THE STATE OF FLORIDA HAS GIVEN
SOME MONEY, BUT NOWHERE NEAR THE
AMOUNT NEEDED.
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT HASN'T COME
UP WITH THE FUNDING, EITHER.
OPPONENTS OF THE JAXPORT
DREDGING PROJECT SAY IT JUST
ISN'T WORTH THE ENVIRONMENTAL
RISKS, OR THE HIGH COST.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S DO OR DIE
FOR JACKSONVILLE.
>> Reporter: UNIVERSITY OF NORTH
FLORIDA PROFESSOR DAVID JAFFEE
SPECIALIZES IN ECONOMIC
SOCIOLOGY AND HAS STUDIED THE
PROJECT.
HE SAYS THERE ARE MANY OTHER
COSTS THAT HAVEN'T BEEN INCLUDED
IN THE PRICE TAG, LIKE FURTHER
TERMINAL UPGRADES AND
MAINTENANCE.
>> I DON'T THINK IT WILL YIELD
THE BENEFITS THAT THEY'VE
CLAIMED, AND I THINK THE COSTS
THAT THEY HAVE ESTIMATED ARE
GROSSLY UNDERESTIMATED.
SO WHEN YOU PUT ALL THAT
TOGETHER, THAT DOESN'T EVEN
INCLUDE THE INCALCULABLE COST TO
THE RIVER ITSELF.
IT'S A PROJECT THAT IT
UNNECESSARY AND, IN MY VIEW,
WOULD BE A MONUMENTAL WASTE OF
TAXPAYER DOLLARS.
>> Reporter: JAFFEE POINTS OUT
THAT JACKSONVILLE IS ALREADY
BEHIND SAVANNAH AND CHARLESTON,
AND HE THINKS THE PROJECTED
TRAFFIC THROUGH THE PANAMA CANAL
WON'T BE SUFFICIENT TO JUSTIFY
SO MANY EAST COAST PORTS
EXPANDING CAPACITY.
HE PREDICTS MANY OF THE BIGGEST
SHIPS WILL UNLOAD ONTO SMALLER
SHIPS IN THE CARIBBEAN THAT WILL
CONTINUE ONTO THE U.S.,
SOMETHING CALLED"
TRANSSHIPMENT."
HE ARGUES JACKSONVILLE SHOULD
VIE INSTEAD FOR THAT TRAFFIC.
>> RATHER THAN TRY TO ENGAGE IN
WHAT I WOULD REGARD AS A KIND OF
DESTRUCTIVE FORM OF COMPETITION,
MY PROPOSAL WOULD BE THAT
JAXPORT AND JACKSONVILLE FOCUS
ON THEIR STRENGTHS.
AND THAT IS DEVELOPING
CONNECTIONS WITH TRADE AND THE
MOVEMENT OF CARGO IN THE
CARIBBEAN AND CENTRAL AND SOUTH
AMERICA.
THAT THEY CAN ATTRACT VESSELS
WHICH MOVE LARGE NUMBERS OF
CONTAINERS THAT ACTUALLY CAN
COME IN CURRENTLY AT THE DEPTH
OF THE RIVER.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME LOCAL
BUSINESS LEADERS DISAGREE.
>> EVERYTHING THAT YOU SEE HERE,
WE IMPORT THROUGH THE PORT OF
JACKSONVILLE.
>> Reporter: MARIE-CLAIRE
ABERCROMBIE MANAGES EAST COAST
DISTRIBUTION FOR BEDROSIANS, A
COMPANY THAT SUPPLIES TILING FOR
FLOORS, BATHROOMS, AND
COUNTERTOPS.
>> IF IT'S SLATE, WE ARE
IMPORTING IT OUT OF INDIA OR
PAKISTAN.
IF IT'S GRANITE, IT'S IMPORTED
OUT OF BRAZIL.
IF IT'S MARBLE, IT'S COMING OUT
OF CHINA OR SPAIN OR ITALY.
>> Reporter: ABERCROMBIE SAYS
BUSINESS IS BOOMING, BUT SHE
SOMETIMES HAS PROBLEMS IMPORTING
HEAVY FREIGHT FROM HER FACTORY
IN CHINA, BECAUSE SPACE ON SHIPS
THAT CAN REACH JACKSONVILLE CAN
BE TIGHT.
SHE SAYS THE ABILITY TO DOCK
BIGGER SHIPS WOULD HELP.
>> THAT WILL BE GREAT FOR US,
BECAUSE IT MEANS OUR PRODUCT CAN
GET HERE QUICKER.
LARGER SHIPS MEANS THAT WE CAN
BRING IN MORE PRODUCTS, WE CAN,
YOU KNOW, SPREAD THE COST OF
THAT TRANSPORTATION OVER MORE
PRODUCTS, AND AGAIN, KEEP THE
COST TO THE CONSUMER LOWER.
>> Reporter: THE POTENTIAL
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS OF
DEEPENING THE HARBOR ARE ALSO A
POINT OF CONTROVERSY.
LISA RINAMAN LEADS THE LOCAL
ADVOCACY GROUP ST. JOHN'S
RIVERKEEPER.
SHE SAYS DIGGING UP THE RIVER
FLOOR COULD HARM ENDANGERED
SPECIES LIKE MANATEES AND SEA
TURTLES, AND COULD DISRUPT THE
DELICATE MIX OF SALT AND FRESH
WATER IN THE RIVER.
>> IN ADDITION TO THE SALT WATER
COMING IN, YOU HAVE EROSION AND
SEDIMENTATION AND ALL OF THESE
CHANGES TO THIS COMPLEX,
DELICATE ECOSYSTEM CAUSES MAJOR
PROBLEMS WITH WATER QUALITY, AS
WELL AS IMPACT TO OUR FISHERIES.
THE INCREASE IN SALT WATER DOES
DAMAGE TO OUR WETLANDS AND
SUBMERGED GRASSES.
THOSE ARE THE KIDNEYS OF THE ST.
JOHNS RIVER, AND SO, WHEN YOU
LOSE THOSE SYSTEMS, ALL OF A
SUDDEN YOU START HAVING MORE
WATER QUALITY PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: THE U.S. ARMY CORPS
OF ENGINEERS, WHICH WOULD
OVERSEE THE DREDGING PROJECT,
HAS A PLAN TO MITIGATE POSSIBLE
DAMAGE TO THE ENVIRONMENT.
BUT RINAMAN SAYS IT'S NOT
ENOUGH.
ST. JOHNS RIVERKEEPER PLANS TO
SUE THE ARMY CORPS TO ADD MORE
PROTECTIONS FOR WETLANDS, THE
SHORELINE AND WILDLIFE.
BUT DREDGING SUPPORTERS SAY
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS SHOULDN'T
OUTWEIGH ECONOMIC ONES.
>> YES.
THE ENVIRONMENTALISTS, I GET IT.
WE HAVE TO SAVE OUR PLANET.
BUT BEFORE WE CAN SAVE THE
ANIMALS, I THINK WE ALSO HAVE TO
LOOK AT THE PEOPLE.
HOW ARE WE TAKING CARE OF THE
PEOPLE?
WE CAN SAVE THE FISH AND WE CAN
SAVE THE TURTLES.
BUT IF THE ECONOMY GOES DOWN,
AND THESE ENVIRONMENTALISTS ARE
NOT GOING TO HAVE A JOB TO FIGHT
FOR OR TO SAVE THE TURTLES.
>> YOU KNOW, A LOT OF TIMES
PEOPLE TRY TO PUT THE
ENVIRONMENT AGAINST THE ECONOMY
AND WE DON'T SEE IT THAT WAY,
BECAUSE THIS COMMUNITY, THIS
STATE THRIVES ON OUR HEALTHY
NATURAL RESOURCES.
HEALTHY RIVERS DRIVE HEALTHY
ECONOMIES, AND SO, THERE HAS TO
BE THAT BALANCE.
>> YEAH, THERE IS NO PERFECT
PRODUCT WHEN IT COMES TO MAN
INTERVENING WITH THE
ENVIRONMENT.
>> LONGSHOREMAN VINCENT CAMERON
SAYS HE UNDERSTANDS THE CONCERNS
ON BOTH SIDES, AND THINKS THEY
CAN BE RESOLVED.
>> WE'RE BETTER NOW THAN WE WERE
MANY YEARS AGO, AS FAR AS THE
BRIGHT MINDS THAT ARE COMING TO
THE TABLE TO MAKE THIS A
REALITY.
AND I THINK THAT WE CAN MANAGE
THIS TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: PORT OFFICIALS SAY
THEY WILL CONTINUE TO LOBBY FOR
GOVERNMENT FUNDING, AND ARE EVEN
CONSIDERING DREDGING A SHORTER
LENGTH OF THE RIVER TO MAKE THE
PROJECT MORE AFFORDABLE.
IN THE MEANTIME, ALL SIDES IN
JACKSONVILLE CONTINUE TO WAIT.
>> Sreenivasan: IRAN'S AGREEMENT
WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FIVE
OTHER WORLD POWERS TO ROLLBACK
ITS NUCLEAR WEAPONS PROGRAM HAS
OFFICIALLY TAKEN EFFECT TODAY.
IN TEHRAN, THE HEAD OF IRAN'S
NUCLEAR PROGRAM SAID THEY WOULD
BEGIN DISMANTLING URANIUM-
ENRICHMENT CENTRIFUGES.
BUT IRAN SAID THAT STEP IS
CONTINGENT ON RECEIVING FORMAL
NOTIFICATION FROM THE U.S. THAT
LONG-STANDING ECONOMIC SANCTIONS
ARE BEING LIFTED.
FOR SOME INSIGHT, I'M JOINED
FROM WASHINGTON BY DAVID
ALBRIGHT, PRESIDENT OF THE
INSTITUTE FOR SCIENCE AND
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY.
THIS IS AN EXAMPLE OF ALL THE
LOGISTICS NECESSARY TO DO THIS.
>> IRAN HAS CREATED A VERY LARGE
NEW CLEAR PROGRAM AND HAS
PARTICULARLY A LARGE URANIUM
ENRICHMENT PROGRAM THAT HAS 18,
1-9D,000 CENTRIFUGES AND IT HAS
TO DISMANTLE AROUND 10,000 OF
THOSE CENTRIFUGES AND PUT THEM
IN MONITORED STORAGE.
AND THOSE CENTRIFUGES THAT ARE
DISMANTLED WOULD BE INSPECTED BY
THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY
AGENCY T SAY LARGE JOB.
HOW QUICKLY COULD IRAN DO IT, NO
ONE KNOWS, THEY COULD BRING IN A
BULL
BULLDOZER INTOED HALLS THAT HOLD
THE CENTRIFUGES AND BULLDOZE
THEM INTO SCRAP.
BUT IF THEY WANT TO TAKE THEM
OUT CAREFULLY ONE BY ONE AND
STORE THEM SO THEY COULD
REFUSE-- REUSE THEM AT A LATER
DADE IF THEY RENEGED ON THE
DEAL, FOR EXAMPLE, THEN IT COULD
TAKE SEVERAL MONTHS.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE SEEMS TO
BE DIFFERENT INCENTIVES FOR HOW
FAST THIS ALL COULD HAPPEN.
>> WELL, I THINK THE U.S. HAS AN
INCENTIVE TO HAVE IT GO ON AS
LONG AS POSSIBLE THEY WANT
THE JOB DONE THOROUGHLY.
THEY WANT TO MAKE SURE IRAN
HASN'T SORT OF DONE ANY
SUBTERFUGE THERE ARE A LOT OF
THINGS THAT HAVE TO BE DONE.
AND SO I THINK FROM THE U.S.
POINT OF VIEW SLOWNESS IS GOOD.
FROM THE IRAN POINT OF VIEW THEY
WANT TO GO AS FAST AS POSSIBLE.
THEY WANT TO GET THIS DONE THIS
FALL.
THEY WANT TO GET THE SANCTIONS,
THE MAJOR PART OF THE SANCTIONS
OFF ON IMPLEMENTATION DAY.
AND HOPEFULLY HAVE THAT DONE
BEFORE THEY HAVE THEIR NEXT
ELECTION.
WHICH COULD BE AS EARLY AS
FEBRUARY FROM WHAT I UNDERSTAND.
>> AND THERE'S ALSO BEEN
TENSIONS AT LEAST ON THE LEFT ON
WHO INSPECTS WHAT, QUESTION.
IRAN HAS SAID CERTAIN SITES WILL
BE INSPECTED BY THEIR OWN PEOPLE
WHICH HAS CAUSED A LOT OF ALARM
BELLS TO GO OFF ELSEWHERE IN THE
WORLD.
>> ONE OF THE BIG ISSUES IN THIS
WHOLE PROCESS IS HOW GOOD ARE
THE INSPECTIONS GOING TO BE.
IRAN HAS REFUSED TO ALLOW THE IA
ACCESS TO MILITARY SITES EXCEPT
UNDER EXTRAORDINARY
CIRCUMSTANCES.
ONE OF WHICH HAPPENED RECENTLY
BUT THE IAEA WAS NOT ALLOWED TO
DO ITS NORMAL PRACTICE OF TAKING
ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLES.
THE IRANIAN DID IT UNDER
SUPERVISION, THERE ARE CONCERNS
IT'S WEAKER THAN WHAT IS NORMAL.
FOR EXAMPLE, WHAT JAPAN ACCEPTS
IN TERMS OF ACCESS,
INTRUSIVENESS OF INSPECTIONS,
IRAN IS RESISTING.
AND IT'S UNCLEAR HOW THAT IS
GOING TO COME OUT.
BUT WHERE IT REALLY DOESN'T
MATTER MUCH IN JAPAN, I MEAN,
WELL, WE TRUST JAPAN IT SURE
MATTERS IN IRAN.
AND HOW THIS PLAYS OUT OVER THE
NEXT SEVERAL MONTHS WILL BE VERY
IMPORTANT TO SEE WHETHER THIS
DEAL IS ACTUALLY NEVER VIABLE IN
THE LONG RUN.
>> AN NONE OF THIS HAPPENS IN A
VACUUM.
THERE IS IRAN'S SUPPORT OF
HEZBOLLAH, THEIR INVOLVEMENT IN
THE SYRIAN WAR.
I MEAN ALL OF THESE THINGS ARE
STILL PLAYING ON THE MINDS OF
EVERYONE ELSE IN THE WORLD
WATCHING WHILE THIS SPECIFIC
INSPECTIONS PROCESS WORKS.
>> WELL, THAT'S RIGHT.
IN THE MIDDLE EAST IS A VERY
TOUGH PLACE.
BUT THE NEW CLEAR DEAL WAS
DESIGNED TO WORK IN THAT TOUGH
ENVIRONMENT.
NOW WHERE ONE ISSUE THAT HAD
TOUCHES UPON THE DEAL WHICH IS A
LITTLE MORE PROBLEMATIC IS THE
WHOLE QUESTION OF MISSILES.
AND IRAN'S RECENT LAUNCH OF A
MISSILE VERY CORROSIVE ON THIS
DEAL BECAUSE IN THE END, IF IRAN
DOES RENEGE ON THE DEAL OR JUST
OUTLASTS THE DEAL, IT DOESN'T
LAST THAT LONG BASED ON THE TIME
LINES IN THE MIDDLE EAST, AND IT
BUILDS NUCLEAR WEAPONS, THOSE
WEAPONS WILL ONLY HAVE MEANING
IF THEY ARE PUT ON BALANCE
STATISTICS MISSILES.
AND THOSE BALANCE STATISTICS
MISSILES WILL HAVE TO BE
ACCURATE AND FAST.
AND IRAN IS WORKING ON THOSE
NOW.
SO I THINK THE UNITED STATES HAS
TO FIND A WAY TO START LIMITING
IOWAN-- IRAN'S ABILITY TO
CONTROL BALLISTIC MISSILES.
>> DAVID ALBRIGHT, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ORGANIZERS
OF NEXT SUMMER'S OLYMPICS IN RIO
DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL, SAY THEY DO
NOT PLAN TO TEST THE WATERWAYS
THAT WILL BE HOME TO AQUATIC
EVENTS.
FOR VIRUSES THAT ATHLETES FEAR
COULD MAKE THEM SICK.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
EXPLAINS.
>> Reporter: THE CONTROVERSY
COVERS RIO'S DIRTY WATERWAYS
THAT WILL BE USED FOR SAILING,
ROWING, CANOEING, TRIATHLON, AND
OPEN DISTANCE SWIMMING.
RIO'S GUANABARA BAY AND OTHER
WATER VENUES ARE POLLUTED WITH
TRASH AND UNTREATED HUMAN
SEWAGE, AND INDEPENDENT TESTS
COMMISSIONED BY THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS IN JULY FOUND HIGH LEVELS
OF VIRUSES IN THESE WATERS.
DOCTORS FOR THE U.S. OLYMPIC
TEAM BLAMED WATER CONTAMINATION
FOR CAUSING 13 AMERICAN ROWERS
TO GET SICK DURING AN AUGUST
PRACTICE RUN ON THE LAKE WHERE
THE ROWING COMPETITION WILL BE
HELD.
VIRUSES CAN CAUSE SEVERE STOMACH
AND RESPIRATORY ILLNESSES THAT
WOULD PREVENT AN ATHLETE FROM
COMPETING.
AND VIRUSES LIVE LONGER THAN
BACTERIA IN TROPICAL CLIMATES
LIKE RIO'S.
BUT AT A PRESS CONFERENCE
FRIDAY, BRAZIL'S OLYMPIC
ORGANIZERS SAID THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION'S LATEST GUIDELINES
BACK THEM UP.
THAT TESTS FOR VIRUSES ARE NOT
NEEDED "BECAUSE OF A LACK OF
STANDARDIZED METHODS AND
DIFFICULTY INTERPRETING
RESULTS."
>> SO WE FULLY RESPECTED THEIR
INSTRUCTIONS.
AS FAR AS WE UNDERSTAND, IT IS
THE FINAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR RIO
2016, WE ARE GOING TO KEEP
MONITORING BUT WE ARE GOING TO
IMPLEMENT IMMEDIATELY THEIR
SUGGESTIONS.
>> Reporter: RIO 2016 WILL ALSO
SAVE MONEY BECAUSE VIRAL TESTING
IS MORE EXPENSIVE AND DIFFICULT
THAN BACTERIAL TESTING.
AS FOR THE TRASH PILING UP ON
THE SHORES OF GUANABARA BAY, RIO
IS RECRUITING VOLUNTEERS TO HELP
PICK IT UP IN EXCHANGE FOR A
CREDIT ON THEIR ELECTRICITY
BILLS.
ORGANIZERS HOPE THE CLEANUP
EFFORTS WILL HELP ACHIEVE RIO'S
GOAL OF REDUCING WATER POLLUTION
BEFORE THE GAMES BEGIN NEXT
SUMMER.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
SOME FIVE STAR CUSTOMER REVIEWS
YOU'VE SEEN FOR PRODUCTS SOLD
FOR AMAZON.COM ARE FAKE AND THE
COMPANY IS TRYING TO STOP THAT.
AMAZON IS SUING MORE THAN A
THOUSAND WRITERS PAID TO POST
GLOWING REVIEWS TO BOOST PRODUCT
PURCHASES.
AMAZON ALLEGES SOME PRODUCT
MAKERS PAY AS LITTLE AS $5 FOR
REVIEWS THAT ARE "FALSE,
MISLEADING AND INAUTHENTIC."
AMAZON PROHIBITS REVIEWS PAID
REVIEWS OF ANY KIND.
AND ON TOMORROW’S NEWSHOUR,
CELLIST YO-YO MA REFLECTS ON A
LIFE OF MAKING MUSIC.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS
FOR WATCHING.